Redesign Security LLM performance matrix (#7146) (#7193)
elastic/docs-content: solutions/security/ai/large-language-model-performance-matrix.md

# Large language model performance matrix for {{elastic-sec}} [llm-performance-matrix]

> This page summarizes internal test results comparing large language models (LLMs) across {{elastic-sec}} [AI chat](/explore-analyze/ai-features/ai-chat-experiences.md) and AI-powered feature use cases. The matrix tests each model across [Agent Builder](/solutions/security/ai/agent-builder/agent-builder.md), Attack Discovery, and Automatic Migration. To learn more about these use cases, refer to [AI-powered features](/explore-analyze/ai-features.md#security-features).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page summarizes internal test results comparing large language models (LLMs) across {{elastic-sec}} [AI chat](/explore-analyze/ai-features/ai-chat-experiences.md) and AI-powered feature use cases. The matrix tests each model across [Agent Builder](/solutions/security/ai/agent-builder/agent-builder.md), [Attack Discovery](/solutions/security/ai/attack-discovery.md), and [Automatic Migration](/solutions/security/get-started/automatic-migration.md). To learn more about these use cases, refer to [AI-powered features](/explore-analyze/ai-features.md#security-features).
```

::::{important}
Higher scores indicate better performance, on a scale of 1 to 10. A score of 10 on a capability means the model met or exceeded all task-specific benchmarks for that capability.

**Any model that scores 5 or below for a capability is not recommended for that task.**
::::

## How the scores are calculated [_how_scores_are_calculated]

> The matrix uses three top-line capability scores — **Agent Builder**, **Attack Discovery**, and **Automatic Migration** — that roll up into a single **Overall Score**. You can read the table top-down, from "how does this model perform across our AI features?" to "how good is it at the specific job I care about?"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The matrix uses three top-line capability scores — Agent Builder, Attack Discovery, and Automatic Migration — that roll up into a single *Overall Score*. You can use the table to answer questions such as "How does this model perform across Elastic's AI features?" and "How good is it at the specific job I care about?"
```

> * **Overall Agent Builder Score** is the average of the seven Agent Builder sub-capabilities (Alert Analysis, Entity Analytics, Threat Hunting, Detection Rules, Workflow Authoring, Triggering Workflows, and Multi-Step Executions). It summarizes how well a model handles agentic Security work end to end.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Overall Agent Builder Score** is the average of the seven Agent Builder [sub-capabilities](#_agent_builder_sub_capabilities). It summarizes how well a model handles agentic Security work end to end.
```

> * **Overall Score** is the average of the Agent Builder, Attack Discovery, and Automatic Migration scores. It reflects how a model performs across the breadth of our AI features rather than any single workflow, and is the default sort for the tables below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Overall Score** is the average of the Agent Builder, Attack Discovery, and Automatic Migration scores. It reflects how a model performs across the breadth of Elastic's AI features rather than any single workflow, and is the default sort for the tables below.
```

> ### What each Agent Builder sub-capability measures [_agent_builder_sub_capabilities]

Reviewer: Do these sub-capabilities correlate to the [built-in Security skills](https://www.elastic.co/docs/explore-analyze/ai-features/agent-builder/builtin-skills-reference#security-skills)? It seems like some of them match the skills, and some don't.

Author: yeah they mostly match security skills (some are extensions)

* **Alert Analysis** — Triage an alert, reach the correct disposition, pull related alerts, and enrich with threat intel.

> * **Entity Analytics** — Investigate hosts and users using purpose-built entity lookups and risk context.

Reviewer: Just checking this is just for hosts and users and doesn't include services?

Author: it checks for skill usage and efficacy.

* **Threat Hunting** — Generate and run queries against process, file, and network telemetry to find specific hunt artifacts.
* **Detection Rules** — Author a working detection rule, grounded in research where requested.
* **Workflow Authoring** — Produce a valid, executable automation workflow (verified by actually creating, enabling, and running it).
* **Triggering Workflows** — Call the correct backed action for the task (for example, a hash lookup, an on-call schedule, or case creation).

> * **Multi-Step Executions** — Chain several steps in the right order, carrying findings forward, without skipping or fabricating steps.

Reviewer: Does this refer to Workflows steps?

Author: triggering workflows = did agent choose to invoke a linked workflows (tool) based on the prompt
workflow authoring = did the LLM use the workflow authoring skill correctly and create a usable workflow based on the pormpt

- multi-step exection = did the LLM chain together things and execute tasks like "look at this alert, find related info on Virus total, categorize severity, and based on severity - find the on-call analyst, create a slack channel, put findings in the slack channel and tag the on-call analyst with all related details and next steps to take"
